---
path: "/blog/usestate-useeffect
date: "2019-09-24"
title: "React Hooks Basics: useState & useEffect"
---

# React Hooks: A brief history

## Before Hooks: The Smart Component, Dumb Component Dichotomy

Before React 16.8, React components could be broadly categorized into "smart" and "dumb" componenents. This was not a commentary on the quality of the code, nor the coder composing it, but a way to differentiate components that involved logic and/or state (smart components), and those that simply rendered markup (dumb components).

## Stateless Functional Components (Dumb)

Let's first take a look at the more elegant, but less powerful "dumb" stateless functional component. That is, a component that that just returns markup.

```javascript

const MyComponent = ({title, description}) => {
  return(
    <div>
      <h1>{title}</h1>
      <p>{description}<p>
    </div>
  )
}
```

These kinds of components do a lovely job at their very simple task: take some data from its smarter colleague, then render that data to the DOM. If we wanted a component to actually _retrieve_ that data, or manage some kind of state, it had to be considerably more complex.

## Class Components (Smart)

Writing any kind of logic or state into a component (i.e. writing a "smart" component) required creating the component as a JavaScript class. Within that class, you could initialize state, and set up any other functions you need as methods on that class.

```javascript
class MyComponent()
{
  state = {
    title: "Foo",
    description: "Bar"
  }

  componentDidMount()
  {
    // logic to run upon mounting the component to the DOM
    let data = this.getDataFromAPI();
    this.setState({
      title: data.title,
      description: data.description
    });
  }

  getDataFromAPI()
  {
    //...
  }

  render()
  {
    return(
      // rendered JSX markup
      <div>
        <h1>{this.state.title}</h1>
        <p>{this.state.description}</p>
      </div>
    )
  }
}
```

## The Problem Hooks Solve

As you see, class-based components get unwieldy quickly, even with minimal logic and state. There are also some JavaScript "gotchas" with binding `this` to the component properly that will trip up all but the most erudite JavaScript wizards.

**Hooks allow you to introduce logic and state to functional components**, no longer requiring the use of a class, and all the additional lines of code that come with a class. Though I wouldn't call the hooks syntax _intuitive_, it is certainly elegant.

Let's take a look at our example component above after a thorough _Hook-ification_.

```javascript
  const MyComponent = () => {

    const [title, setTitle] = useState('');
    const [description, setDescription] = useState('');

    const getDataFromAPI = () => {
      //...
    }

    useEffect(() => {
      getDataFromAPI();
    }
    return(
      <div>
        <h1>{title}</h1>
        <p>{description}</p>
      </div>
    )
  });
```

## Less code to write

Let's talk about the obvious benefits first: Our pre-hooks example was 32 lines long. In our hooks-based example, the same logic, state, and markup were all written into just 19 lines. This benefit is even more apparent when converting larger class components.

## `useState` over state objects and `setState` calls

`useState` initialization is a bit weird, but it allows for much more elegant references to your state in markup, and easier state updates. Instead of initalizing a state object and updating its values with `React.setState`, you initialize a value and a corresponding function to update that value. In our example, the initialization line for `title` looks like this:

```javascript
[title, setTitle] = useState("");
```

It can then be referenced in your JSX simply by using `title`, rather than the older-style `this.state.title`. Correspondingly, the title can be updated using `setTitle(value)`, rather than `this.setState({title: value})`.

## useEffect over Lifecycle Methods

`useEffect` effectively replaces all the lifecycle methods used in class components. I'm still exploring all the options for this, but very simply, any logic written into the `useEffect` function will happen before the component renders.

It also has a built-in option for cleanup when unmounting the component. Use the `return` statement of useEffect to return a function that will be called whenever your component is unmounted from the DOM. This is a good place to remove event listeners and any other garbage you might overwise leave lying around in your code.

## Wrap it up, dude..

Yeah, you're right. This is getting a bit long.

Hooks were a paradigm shift in React development. This is how components will be written for the foreseeable future, so I'd encourage any stragglers (like myself, until somewhat recently) to take the time to understand them.

That said, since no one in their right mind is going to go back and re-write a complex application in hooks just because they are new and shiny, React devs will be working with these older-style components for some time. I hope this post has helped - and continues to help - devs understand the problems these types of components solved for, and how hooks improved what they started.
