---
path: "/blog/should-i-boot-camp
date: "2019-09-25"
title: "Should I Enroll in a Code Boot Camp?"
---

# Should I Enroll in a Code Boot Camp?: Some questions to consider

## Why should you listen to me?

As many friends or recruiters (**WINK**) know, I attended a 6-month code bootcamp from February to August of 2018. I'm a little over a year removed from the graduation, so I've had time to reflect on it.

Spoiler alert: It was an excellent experience, and I'd highly encourage others in the same position to do it, but it's important to consider a few questions first.

## Questions to consider:

### 1. What do you hope to get out of the experience?

Are you hoping to make a career change? Gain a new skillset to help in your current role? Do you have a specific product in mind, and you need to learn to build it yourself?

Whatever the motivation is, it's important to remain fixated upon that goal, and extract every bit of value you can from each class that will help you achieve that goal. Don't let the class dictate what you get out of it. Have a goal in mind, and ensure you understand how the class is getting you closer to that goal.

#### For me, I hoped to expand on the self-taught skills I'd learned so far, ultimately aiming to switch careers and get hired as a software developer at the company I worked for. I made this goal known to my instructors and classmates, and I asked a ton of questions to help place what I was learning in the context of how I might use it in the day-to-day of a software engineer at my company.

### 2. How much coding have you done prior to this?

If the answer is 'zero', I'd highly encourage you to try a free course on the technologies taught at the bootcamp. See what you think after this free course. Is it still for you?

This is not meant to gatekeep or discourage. The material will be challenging, and you shouldn't talk yourself out of this career change if that's the only problem. It's just important to know what you're getting into, and a quick Codecademy or Treehouse course is enough context for someone to get a decent estimate of what they'll be learning.

If you do decide this isn't for you at this step, that's okay! You'll save a tremendous amount of time and money foregoing this route, and if you take the time to explore the subject matter, you'll gain an appreciation for the complex work software developers do.

#### For me, I'd already undergone years of tinkering and fiddling around with code. This involved lots of tutorials, reading a few books, and even doing some light web design work. Self-driven learning requires way more discipline than I can muster, so I realized I needed the structure of a class to move myself from the "hobbyist" level to "employable" level.

#### The years of fiddling were a big leg-up in my boot camp, but I wouldn't say it's an absolute must. Gain as much context as you can before enrolling, and if that context _excites_ you rather than horrifies you, I say go for it.

### 3. How do you plan to pay for it?

You're usually presented with enticing loan options, much in the same way that we are with student loans in college. I've learned a lot about flippantly signing for things since 18-year-old me happily did so on a slew of loans, and I'm sure you have, too.

This is a point where it's very important to pause and think through your options. There is a powerful _emotional_ tug toward enrolling, at whatever cost, because your mind is filled with the life-changing effects this course will have on you. I'm not saying it won't, but don't let this talk you into colossal debt.

The promise of finding a high-paying developer job quickly after graduation is possible, but it doesn't always happen right away, and it's best to not bank on that happening in order to pay for the course.

If you do not have the money to pay for it outright, I'd highly paying in installments, if that is offered.

#### My bootcamp had an option to pay tuition in increments every couple of months. These payments were, even individually, the most money I've had to shell out for something in my life. My wife and I had to adjust our lifestyle to accomodate this new cost, but in the end, I'm much better off. I was able to start the course without waiting to save a massive amount of money, and I didn't have to take out any loans.

### 4. How much time can you commit to this?

This is possibly the most intense way to learn a new skillset. It's massively draining, and you're not going to be able to half-ass it. You have to aim to stay ahead. Just staying "caught up" to the current lesson topic leaves you in a fragile state. One confusing topic will put you behind.

John Sonmez had some solid advice on this: Aim to be the #1 student, or at least in the top 10%. In order to do this, **you have to go all in**. If you get behind, the cohort cannot wait for you to catch up, and you become a liability on group projects.

Can you learn a lot as a casual attendee? Sure. But, if you have any goal in mind besides just learning the basics of development and working on some hobby side projects, you will absolutely need to make this pretty much your sole focus for the duration of the course.

#### In my situation, I couldn't quit my job and attend a full-time course. I found a boot camp that offered a "Full Stack Flex" program. The course ran much longer (6 months instead of 3), but since classes didn't start until nighttime, I could head straight to class after work.

#### I committed pretty much every waking hour outside of work to the course, and to researching the tech I was learning, which allowed me to stay ahead, and even be a resource to other members of the cohort.

## Wrap it up..

Code bootcamps are a powerful way to accelerate the learning process, but are _only_ worth it if you are passionate about learning to code, and have some sense of the bigger picture you want to achieve. Be honest with yourself about how much you can take on, and really dive into the topics ahead of time before you start this rewarding - but ALSO very stressful and expensive - journey.
